storage: Add PowerStore driver (#18172)
canonical/lxd: doc/reference/storage_powerstore.md

(storage-powerstore)=
# Dell PowerStore - `powerstore`

Dell PowerStore is a storage solution from [Dell Technologies](https://www.dell.com/).
It offers the consumption of block storage across the network.

> LXD supports connecting to PowerStore storage through {abbr}`iSCSI (Internet Small Computer Systems Interface)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LXD supports connecting to PowerStore storage through {abbr}`iSCSI` (Internet Small Computer Systems Interface).
```

We have `abbr` roles elsewhere in the documentation, with the full term in parentheses *within* the `abbr` role. I would, however, prefer to gradually transition to moving the full term into parentheses *outside* of the role. This way, the full term is immediately visible to readers, without needing to hover the cursor over the abbreviation. At the same time, using an `abbr` role for the abbreviation alone means that it will still be wrapped in `<abbr>` HTML tags, which should help with accessibility.

Ensure that the required kernel modules and the iSCSI CLI (`iscsiadm`) are installed on your host system.

## Terminology

PowerStore does not have a concept of storage pools.
Instead, LXD scopes its volumes to a storage pool by prefixing each volume name with a deterministic storage pool identifier.
This prefix prevents name conflicts between volumes belonging to different LXD storage pools on the same PowerStore array.

LXD creates volumes on the PowerStore array and maps them to the respective LXD host.
When the first volume needs to be mapped to a specific LXD host, LXD discovers and connects to the available targets provided by PowerStore.

## The `powerstore` driver in LXD

The `powerstore` driver in LXD uses PowerStore volumes for custom storage volumes, instances, and snapshots.

> All created volumes are thin-provisioned block volumes. If required (for example, for containers and custom file system volumes), LXD formats the volume with a desired file system.

Reviewer: "All created volumes" --- Can you specify "what" is creating the volumes? So something along the lines of, "All volumes created by X are ...", where "X" is replaced with whatever is correct (LXD, PowerStore, the `powerstore` driver, etc.)

> LXD expects PowerStore to be pre-configured and made accessible to LXD by specifying authentication credentials during storage pool creation. Furthermore, LXD assumes that it has full control over the volumes it manages.

Reviewer: Who "specifies" the authentication credentials? Does LXD specify the credentials, or PowerStore? Would it be possible to reword this to clarify how this specification happens?

This driver provides remote storage.
As a result, and depending on the internal network, storage access might be a bit slower compared to local storage.

> On the other hand, using remote storage has significant advantages in a cluster setup: all cluster members have access to the same storage pools with the exact same contents, without the need to synchronize them.

Reviewer: The final "them" could refer to the "clusters", the "storage pools," or the "contents." Looking at the PowerFlex driver page, it looks like "them" refers to "storage pools," is that correct? How about:

```suggestion
On the other hand, using remote storage has significant advantages in a cluster setup: all cluster members have access to the same storage pools with the exact same contents, without the need to synchronize the storage pools.
```

When a volume is first mapped to the LXD host, LXD discovers the available targets from the PowerStore array and connects to them.

> Alternatively, you can specify which targets to use with {config:option}`storage-powerstore-pool-conf:powerstore.target`.

Reviewer: How about:

```suggestion
Alternatively, you can specify the targets with {config:option}`storage-powerstore-pool-conf:powerstore.target`.
```

> Volume snapshots are supported by PowerStore. When a volume with at least one snapshot is copied, LXD sequentially copies snapshots into the destination volume, from which a new snapshot is created. Finally, once all snapshots are copied, the source volume is copied into the destination volume.

Reviewer: What is the "new snapshot" (singular) that is created from the sequentially copied snapshots (plural)? Is it the case that an entirely new snapshot (not present on the original volume) is created on the destination volume?

Author: Certain storage drivers do not support copying volumes along all of its snapshots. You can copy either a volume or snapshot (singular) into a new volume (or overwrite an existing volume).

Therefore, to copy a volume and all of it snapshots, we use a workaround where we copy each snapshot into the destination volume and create a snapshot out of it. We repeat the process for each snapshot. Once snapshots are copied, we copy the actual volume into destination volume. As a result we have a volume and all of its snapshots copied.

Probably this example will be more helpful than my explanation: 
```
Source volume

┌──────────────────────────────┐

│ Volume V                     │

│                              │

│ Snapshots:                   │

│   S1 ──► S2 ──► S3           │

└──────────────────────────────┘

Copy process

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

1. Copy first snapshot data

   S1 ───────────────────────────────► Destination volume

                                      ┌──────────────┐

                                      │ Data from S1 │

                                      └──────────────┘

                                             │

                                             ▼

                                      Create snapshot S1'

2. Copy next snapshot data

   S2 ───────────────────────────────► Destination volume

                                      ┌──────────────┐

                                      │ Data from S2 │

                                      └──────────────┘

                                             │

                                             ▼

                                      Create snapshot S2'

3. Copy next snapshot data

   S3 ───────────────────────────────► Destination volume

                                      ┌──────────────┐

                                      │ Data from S3 │

                                      └──────────────┘

                                             │

                                             ▼

                                      Create snapshot S3'

4. Copy final source volume data

   V  ───────────────────────────────► Destination volume

                                      ┌──────────────┐

                                      │ Final volume │

                                      └──────────────┘

Result

┌──────────────────────────────┐

│ Destination volume            │

│                              │

│ Snapshots:                   │

│   S1' ──► S2' ──► S3'         │

│                              │

│ Current content: copied V    │

└──────────────────────────────┘
```

Reviewer 2: @MusicDin should this be marked as resolved?

Author: I've left explanation for @elijahgreenstein who might provide suggestions for improving clarity of the sequential snapshot explanation.

(storage-powerstore-volume-names)=
### Volume names

The driver uses the volume's {config:option}`storage-powerstore-volume-conf:volatile.uuid` to generate a volume name.
As described in the [terminology section](storage-powerstore), the pool-scoped prefix `lxd-<pool_name_hash>-` is prepended to all volume names.

For example, a UUID `5a2504b0-6a6c-4849-8ee7-ddb0b674fd14` is used as the base of the volume name.
To distinguish volume types, special identifiers are prepended and appended to the volume names, as depicted in the table below:

Type                       | Identifier   | Example
:--                        | :---         | :----------
Container                  | `c_`         | `c_5a2504b0-6a6c-4849-8ee7-ddb0b674fd14`
Virtual machine            | `v_`         | `v_5a2504b0-6a6c-4849-8ee7-ddb0b674fd14.b` (block volume) and `v_5a2504b0-6a6c-4849-8ee7-ddb0b674fd14` (file system volume)
Image (ISO)                | `i_`         | `i_5a2504b0-6a6c-4849-8ee7-ddb0b674fd14.i`
Custom volume              | `u_`         | `u_5a2504b0-6a6c-4849-8ee7-ddb0b674fd14` (file system volume) and `u_5a2504b0-6a6c-4849-8ee7-ddb0b674fd14.b` (block volume)

> Mountable snapshot clone   | `s`          | `sc_5a2504b0-6a6c-4849-8ee7-ddb0b674fd14` (container), `sv_5a2504b0-6a6c-4849-8ee7-ddb0b674fd14.b` (VM) and `su_5a2504b0-6a6c-4849-8ee7-ddb0b674fd14` (custom volume)

Reviewer: A few comments here:

1. Do we need to link back to the terminology section here? That section doesn't provide much additional information beyond what you've described here.
2. The examples in the table don't fully match the prefix you've described here. Shouldn't they each be prepended with `lxd-<pool_name_hash>`? Maybe include a note to indicate that the examples are missing that, to avoid taking up too much space?
3. The table clearly draws attention to the prepended identifiers (`c_`, `v_`, etc.), but the `.i` and `.b` appended to the names are only evident from a close look at the table. Maybe specify that those are the identifiers appended to the names?
4. When I see "and" in the table examples, it makes me think that all listed volume names must be created for that one type. For example, both a "block volume" and a "file system volume" for the virtual machine. However, I would think that you're just showing the differences for these different types of volumes, either of which may be set up. How about removing the "and"? This would also make each example line up.

How about something like the following:

```suggestion
The driver uses the volume's {config:option}`storage-powerstore-volume-conf:volatile.uuid` to generate a volume name.
The pool-scoped prefix `lxd-<pool_name_hash>-` is prepended to all volume names.
To distinguish volume types, special identifiers are also prepended and appended to the volume names. 
Appended identifiers include `.i` and `.b`.

The examples in the table below are based on UUID `5a2504b0-6a6c-4849-8ee7-ddb0b674fd14`.
Note that the `lxd-<pool_name_hash>` prefix has been removed from these examples.

Type                       | Identifier   | Example
:--                        | :---         | :----------
Container                  | `c_`         | `c_5a2504b0-6a6c-4849-8ee7-ddb0b674fd14`
Virtual machine            | `v_`         | `v_5a2504b0-6a6c-4849-8ee7-ddb0b674fd14.b` (block volume)  `v_5a2504b0-6a6c-4849-8ee7-ddb0b674fd14` (file system volume)
Image (ISO)                | `i_`         | `i_5a2504b0-6a6c-4849-8ee7-ddb0b674fd14.i`
Custom volume              | `u_`         | `u_5a2504b0-6a6c-4849-8ee7-ddb0b674fd14` (file system volume) `u_5a2504b0-6a6c-4849-8ee7-ddb0b674fd14.b` (block volume)
Mountable snapshot clone   | `s`          | `sc_5a2504b0-6a6c-4849-8ee7-ddb0b674fd14` (container), `sv_5a2504b0-6a6c-4849-8ee7-ddb0b674fd14.b` (VM) `su_5a2504b0-6a6c-4849-8ee7-ddb0b674fd14` (custom volume)
```

Reviewer: Or, since the suffixes are appended in some, but not all, cases:

```
The pool-scoped prefix `lxd-<pool_name_hash>-` is prepended to all volume names along with special identifiers, such as `c_` or `v_`, to distinguish volume types.
Additional identifiers, such as `.i` and `.b`, may also be appended to further distinguish volume types.
```

Author: Thanks, I've adjusted based on you example. 
The VM is an exception, in which case both block and filesystem volumes are created (the only place where `and` is actually suitable).
